# Content Navigation

## Order of the Content

The units are designed to be read in order from beginning to end. You can skip ahead to later content, and it may make sense to do this if the earlier content is already familiar to you. However, if you don't know the content from earlier sections, the later sections may be very difficult to understand.

## Menu

There should be a menu button on the top left corner of your screen. When you click it, you will see a list of units and sections on the left side of the screen. Clicking on the title of a section will bring you to that section. This can be used for navigation in addition to the "Next page" and "Previous page" buttons.

## Dropdowns

There are some dropdowns in the content with extra information. They are called dropdowns because they "drop down" when you click them. You can try clicking the dropdown below to see how it works.

::: details This is a dropdown
Here is some text that does not appear until you click the dropdown.
:::

## Test your understanding questions

In some sections, there will be questions to test and see if you understand certain concepts. Each answer has its own dropdown. Below is an example question. You can click on any answer to get feedback about whether it's correct. There's no penalty for getting an answer wrong, and you can try as many times as you like.

### How many hours are there in a day?

::: details 24 hours

### Correct

There are 24 hours in a day.
:::
::: details 10 hours
This answer is not correct.
:::

This question is made purposefully easy, but the later questions will actually test understanding of the content.

## Links

Links are things you click that take you somewhere else. There are some links in the course to navigate between sections. These are indicated with blue, underlined text. For instance, there is a link below to the previous page about restrictions. You can click on it to see how it works, and then navigate back to this page using the "Next page" button.

[Link to Restrictions page](./1.3-restrictions.md)

## Sources

Most of the content in this course is original. There are some images that were taken from external sources, and we have included a page of image sources in the Conclusion section.
